#summary Log of most significant changes between releases over time

= OpenMalaria releases =

Below is a list of the most significant changes in each release, together with the date and revision number of initial release. Releases are available as tags in the subversion repository: [http://code.google.com/p/openmalaria/source/browse/#svn%2Ftags http://openmalaria.googlecode.com/svn/tags]

== Schema Version 30 ==

Yet to be released. Planned changes:

  * Renamed Vector_EIR_Input and Vector_EIR_Simulated to inputEIR and simulatedEIR respectively.
  * Increased delay in human infectiousness model from the perspective of the non-vector model and several summaries: it appears it was one time-step short.
  * Bug fix in REPORT_ONLY_AT_RISK: after a case at time 0, times 2-5 were considered not-at-risk. This corrects those timesteps to 1-4.
  * `mode` parameter of `<entomology>` element now takes keyword value: `dynamic` or `forced`.
  * Vector model XML parameters now largely use elements instead of being one long string of attributes.
  * Vector parameters `α_i`, `P_B_i`, `P_C_i` and `P_D_i` (rate of encountering hosts and probabilities of biting, escaping and resting respectively) may now vary across humans to simulate human heterogeneity.
  * NC has extended the vector model with simulation of the egg, larval and pupal life-stages.
  * A larviciding using the vector life-cycle model will be included.
  * *Vector-model inputs will be changed:* transmission input will be in the form of a seasonality profile and IBPAPA (infectious bites per adult per annum), where the seasonality profile can be that of transmission (as before) or that of vector densities. Fitting of internal parameters to reproduce this seasonality _should_ be better than before (in progress).
  * SchemaTranslator is now compiled by cmake (output is _build_/util/SchemaTranslator/SchemaTranslator.jar)
  * Seasonality parameterisation of per-vector transmission is now input differently to allow other data sources to be used as seasonality inputs in the future.


== Schema Version 29 ==

Released on 21st June as r1902.

  * New ITN model
  * MSAT for 5-day timestep.


== Schema Version 28 ==

Released on 24th May 2011 as r1836.

Big rearrangements of interventions content, moving from grouping by description
and deployment type to grouping by intervention. This should make experiment
design easier. Each intervention can optionally have a name attribute.

Changed some names:
  * drugDescription -> pharmacology
  * entoData -> entomology
  * eir -> EIR
  * monthlyEir -> monthlyEIR

Added optional name attributes to intervention descriptions.

New implementation of imported infections "intervention".

Larviciding intervention removed; it will be replaced by a more accurate model
later.


== Schema Version 27 ==

Released on 6th May 2011 as r1811.

  * Fix for Penny's infection model (code)
  * There should no longer be NaNs in output files when the model runs successfully
  * new continuous reporting option: median immunity Y
  * descriptions of vector interventions are no longer required in cases where the  intervention is never deployed
  * bug fix: initialize microscopy count
  * made transmission warm-up fitting problems interrupt the program again


== Schema Version 26 ==

Released on 23rd February 2011 as r1704.

  * Transmission model's initialization strategies updated.
  * Simulated EIR outputs changed to only be outputs from adults.
  * Implementation of Penny infection model and unittest against Matlab densities.
  * Decay functions updated with "step" function and optional heterogeneity.
  * 1-day time-step case-management: treatment-seeking delays for UC cases has new description.
  * Non-malaria morbidity: separate P(need antibiotic treatment) for fevers classified as malarial.


== Schema Version 25 ==

Released on 24th Janruary 2011 as r1622.

  * Non-malaria fever modelling implemented
  * Cumulative intervention deployment: bring coverage up to a target level
  * MDA intervention may now be configured as "screen & treat" (1-day time-step)
  * Some IV-drug corrections and (hopefullly) a speed-up
  * Decay of vector-stage interventions and vaccines can now be modelled using several different functions
  * Vaccine codes are now PEV/BSV/TBV instead of 1/2/3
  * Deterministic case management trees no longer make an unnecessary random-number generator call
  * Time-steps encapsulated in a new class for added type-saftey


== Schema Version 24 ==

Released on 27th December 2010 as r1578.

  * units of EIR input changed to be adult-averaged in all cases
  * vector fitting revision: use a single 5-year period
  * drug code for intravenous administration of drugs (where duration of administration is significant)
  * proposed cohort implementation completed: options for removal and all outputs restricted to cohorts
  * generic handling of data per age-group and interpolation methods
  * heterogeneity in human weight included


== Schema Version 23 ==

Released on November 4th 2010 as r1420, tagged openmalaria-649.