#summary Description of mosquito-stage malarial interventions

= Mosquito-stage interventions =

The following table lists interventions which have been implemented in OpenMalaria, and which deployment methods are available:

|| intervention || mass-deployment || continuous-deployment ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Change_EIR changeEIR] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Insecticide_Treated_Nets ITN] || yes || yes ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Indoor_Residual_Spraying IRS] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Vector_Availability VectorAvailability] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Larviciding larviciding] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervVector#Uninfect_Vectors uninfectVectors] || yes || no ||

Note: all but the changeEIR intervention depend on the vector transmission model.

== Change EIR ==

This intervention is used to replace transmission settings. It can be used, for example, to switch to EIR settings recorded during a trial. It can only be used with the non-vector transmission model.

The `changeEIR` element has the same type as the [http://code.google.com/p/openmalaria/wiki/XmlScenario#Non-vector_parameters:_nonVector nonVector] element.

{{{
    <changeEIR>
      <timed eipDuration="10" time="0">
        <EIRDaily origin="interpolate">0.00219</EIRDaily>
        <EIRDaily origin="interpolate">0.00210</EIRDaily>
        <EIRDaily origin="interpolate">0.00202</EIRDaily>
        ...
      </timed>
    </changeEIR>
}}}

The new EIR is always applied from the _beginning_ of the intervention period, _not_ the step of deployment. It must thus always contain enough daily entries for the entire intervention period.

== Net / indoor spraying interventions ==

The following interventions all work by multiplying [XmlEntoVector vector model] parameters affecting individual humans.

Description of all effects uses the generic [ModelDecayFunctions decay functions framework] — see [ModelDecayFunctions#Configuration configuration] (`DecayFunctionValue` elements).

=== Insecticide Treated Nets ===

ITNs affect the availability of hosts to mosquitoes, and the chance of a mosquito successfully biting and fleeing an ITN-protected human. These properties are described per mosquito species, in the `interventions` `descriptions` section. For example, in schema 28 and older versions, this looked like:

{{{
<anopheles mosquito="gambiae_ss">
  <ITNDescription name="LLIN test">
    <deterrency L="3" function="exponential" initial="0.44"/>
    <preprandialKillingEffect L="3" function="exponential" initial="0.27"/>
    <postprandialKillingEffect L="3" function="exponential" initial="0.27"/>
  </ITNDescription>
</anopheles>
}}}

ITN uses standard [ModelInterventions#Continuous_descriptions continuous] and [ModelInterventions#Timed_descriptions timed] deployment.


From schema 29 onwards, the ITN physical state (measured through a hole index) and chemical state (measured through insecticide concentration) decay with time. The hole index does this through formation of holes, the insecticide concentration through wear and aging. The effects of the net, depending on its state, are calculated using functions describing the relationship between effect and state.
{{{    
<ITN name="Extended ITNs">
      <description>
        <usage value="0.75"/>
}}}
"value" Type: proportion; Unit: none; Min: 0; Max:1; 
Explanation: Usage represents the proportion of time during the night that a net is used by the person. Because in the current model all mosquito species bite homogeneously throughout the night, usage value can also be seen as the πi value, the proportion of encounters out of all encounters with mosquitoes that an unprotected subject has during the time he would be under an ITN if he used one. If this value differs between mosquito species because of different preferential biting times and location (indoors vs outdoors), instead of through the `usage value` the πi has to be factored into the `holeFactor`, the `insecticideFactor` and the `interactionFactor` for each effect and each species (see below).
{{{
        <holeRate mean="1.80" sigma="0.80"/>
}}}
"mean" Type: real; Unit: number per annum; Min: 0; Max: +Inf; 
Explanation: Each new net is assigned a fixed rate of hole formation. Holes are formed according to a Poisson process with this rate as (only) parameter.

"sigma" Type: real; Unit: none; Min: 0; Max: +Inf;
Explanation: The value of the rate of hole formation is varied among nets by multiplying with a distribution factor which is log normally distributed. For the distribution factor, a sample is taken from a normal distribution with mean=0 and var=1. The sample is multiplied by sigma and summed with mu=-0.5sigma^2^, prior to exponentiation. Note that with mu=-0.5sigma^2^, then the mean of the lognormal distribution =1.
{{{
        <ripRate mean="1.80" sigma="0.80"/>
}}}
"mean" Type: real; Unit: none; Min: 0; Max: +Inf;
Explanation: Each existing hole has a probability of being ripped bigger according to a Poisson process with this rate as (only)parameter.

"sigma" Type: real; Unit: none; Min: 0; Max: +Inf;
Explanation: See first under holeRate "sigma". The normal sample is the same as for holeRate distribution factor, sigma of the lognormal can be varied.
{{{
        <ripFactor value="0.3"/>
}}}
"value" Type: real; Unit: none; Min: 0; Max: +Inf;
Explanation: This factor expresses how important rips are in increasing the hole. The hole index of a net is the count of holes plus the "ripFactor" multiplied with the cumulative number of rips.
{{{
        <initialInsecticide mu="68.4" sigma="14"/>
}}}
The insecticide concentration of new nets is Gaussian distributed. Negative sampled values are set to 0. The insecticideScalingFactor under anophelesParams should be adjusted depending on the size of mu. The deltamethrin declared content is 1.8 g/kg corresponding to 68.4 mg/msq for long-lasting (incorporated into filaments) insecticidal nets according to WHO interim specification 333/LN/3 (August 2010)
(http://www.who.int/whopes/quality/Deltamethrin_LN_incorporated_into_filaments_WHO_spec_eval_Aug_2010.pdf)
{{{
        <insecticideDecay L="1.5" function="exponential" mu="-0.32" sigma="0.8"/>
}}}
L = rate, k=shape, function (exponential is suggested), and mu and sigma are parameters of the distribution factor for the rate (same sample as for holeRate distribution factor).
{{{
        <attritionOfNets L="20.7725" function="smooth-compact" k="18"/>
}}}
attritionOfNets describes how nets disappear from the population ON TOP OF disappearance due to outmigration and population renewal (see comment directly under "interventions"). Currently, this is independent of net state, and the time till disappearence is predefined according to the decay function when a nets is first implemented.
{{{
        <anophelesParams mosquito="gambiae_ss">
          <deterrency holeFactor="0.5" holeScalingFactor="0.10" insecticideFactor="0.67" insecticideScalingFactor="0.10" interactionFactor="1.492537"/>
}}}
`RelativeAttractiveness=exp(log(holeFactor)*exp(-HoleIndex*holeScalingFactor)+log(insecticideFactor)*1-exp(-InsecticideConcentration*insecticideScalingFactor))+log(interactionFactor)*exp(-HoleIndex*holeScalingFactor)*1-exp(-InsecticideConcentration*insecticideScalingFactor)))`

NOTE: The exponential function prevents the RelativeAttractiveness from becoming negative. The `interactionFactor` can be calculated from experimental hut data: observed RelativeAttractiveness value for intact treated divided by the product of the observed RelativeAttractiveness values for intact untreated (`holeFactor`) and holed treated (`insecticideFactor`). If the `holeFactor`=1 `insecticideFactor`=1 and `interactionFactor`=1, the RelativeAttractiveness=1 and there is 0 effect of the net.

If the experimental hut data had subjects under ITNs during the whole biting period, and if the the πi value is to be factored in for each mosquito species (thus not via the `usage value`), the factors for `deterrency` change as follows:

`holeFactor=1-πi * (1-RelativeAttractiveness values for intact untreated nets)`

`insecticideFactor=1-πi * (1-RelativeAttractiveness values for holed treated nets)`

`interactionFactor=(1-πi * (1-RelativeAttractiveness values for intact treated nets))/holeFactor * insecticideFactor`

{{{
          <preprandialKillingEffect baseFactor="0.09" holeFactor="0.57" holeScalingFactor="0.10" insecticideFactor="0.604" insecticideScalingFactor="0.10" interactionFactor="-0.424"/>
}}}
`Relative pre-prandial survival=(1-(baseFactor+insecticideFactor * (1-exp(-InsecticideConcentration * insecticideScalingFactor))	  +holeFactor * exp(-HoleIndex.holeScalingFactor)+interactionFactor * exp(-HoleIndex * holeScalingFactor) * (1-exp(-InsecticideConcentration * insecticideScalingFactor))))/(1-baseFactor)`

Note: The factors can be calculated from data as follows: 

`baseFactor = proportion killed by a badly holed untreated net` 

`holeFactor = proportion killed by an intact untreated net - baseFactor` 

`insecticideFactor = proportion killed by a badly holed treated net - baseFactor` 

`interactionFactor = proportion killed by an intact treated net - baseFactor - holeFactor - insecticideFactor`

If the `holeFactor`=0 `insecticideFactor`=0 and `interactionFactor`=0, the relative pre-prandial survival=1 and there is 0 effect of the net.

If the experimental hut data had subjects under ITNs during the whole biting period, and if the the πi value is to be factored in for each mosquito species (thus not via the `usage value`), the factors for `preprandialKillingEffect` change as follows:

`holeFactor=πi * (proportion killed by intact untreated nets -baseFactor)`

`insecticideFactor=πi * (proportion killed by badly holed treated nets -baseFactor)`

`interactionFactor=πi * (proportion killed by intact treated nets)-baseFactor-holeFactor-insecticideFactor)`


{{{
          <postprandialKillingEffect baseFactor="0.10" holeFactor="0" holeScalingFactor="0.10" insecticideFactor="0.55" insecticideScalingFactor="0.10" interactionFactor="0"/>
}}}
The relative post-prandial survival is calculated similarly to the pre-prandial survival.
{{{
        </anophelesParams>
      </description>
        <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.0833"/>
}}}
Note that at a very young age (under 1 year), the current models may force unrealistically high outmigration (see also comment in demographics section). If the amount of nets allocated is relevant (e.g. for costing), this has to be taken into consideration, especially when nets are distributed continuously at a very young age.
The minimum targetAgeYrs has to be > timestep/365 in order to correspond to timestep=1, because timestep=0 is not allowed for continuous interventions. 
{{{
      <timed coverage="0.785258112" maxAge="5" minAge="0" time="364"/>
     </ITN>
}}}


=== Indoor Residual Spraying ===

IRS affects the availability of hosts to mosquitoes, and the chance of a mosquito surviving resting (egg incubation) after having fed on an IRS-protected human.

Two models are available, each with its own description. Only one should be used at once. Both use standard [ModelInterventions#Timed_descriptions timed deployment].

==== Older/simpler model ====
{{{
    <IRS name="DDT test">
      <simpleDescription>
        <decay L="0.5" function="exponential"/>
        <anophelesParams mosquito="gambiae_ss" propActive="1">
          <deterrency value="0.56"/>
          <preprandialKillingEffect value="0"/>
          <postprandialKillingEffect value="0.24"/>
        </anophelesParams>
        <anophelesParams mosquito="funestus" propActive="1">
          <deterrency value="0.56"/>
          <preprandialKillingEffect value="0"/>
          <postprandialKillingEffect value="0.24"/>
        </anophelesParams>
        <anophelesParams mosquito="arabiensis" propActive="1">
          <deterrency value="0.56"/>
          <preprandialKillingEffect value="0"/>
          <postprandialKillingEffect value="0.24"/>
        </anophelesParams>
      </simpleDescription>
      <timed>
        <deploy coverage="0.95" time="7"/>
      </timed>
    </IRS>
}}}
Three effects are available. The preprandialKillingEffect is only available as of schema 30, the other two previously (but XML has slightly different structure).

All effects decay based on the decay function described (in this case, exponential decay with a half-life of 0.5 years; see [ModelDecayFunctions] for more options).

==== Newer model ====
The newer model is similar to the ITN model above (without the hole factors). Description is as follows:
{{{
    <IRS name="new param">
      <description>
        <!-- Initial insecticide: units are μg/cm²; no variance here -->
        <initialInsecticide mu="118" sigma="0"/>
        <insecticideDecay L="0.15" function="exponential"/>
        <anophelesParams mosquito="gambiae_ss">
          <deterrency insecticideFactor="0.12" insecticideScalingFactor="0.05"/>
          <preprandialKillingEffect baseFactor="0.01" insecticideFactor="0.25" insecticideScalingFactor="0.008"/>
          <postprandialKillingEffect baseFactor="0.01" insecticideFactor="0.5" insecticideScalingFactor="0.006"/>
        </anophelesParams>
      </description>
      <timed>
        <deploy coverage="0.05775" cumulativeWithMaxAge="36" time="18"/>
        <deploy coverage="0.1155" cumulativeWithMaxAge="36" time="19"/>
        <deploy coverage="0.17325" cumulativeWithMaxAge="36" time="20"/>
        ...
      </timed>
    </IRS>
}}}
Insecticide content decays according to the decay function given. Effects are a function of the remaining insecticide content:
  * relative availability = exp( log(insecticideFactor) × [1-exp(-insecticideContent × insecticideScalingFactor)] )
  * killing effect = baseFactor + insecticideFactor × [1-exp(-insecticideContent × insecticideScalingFactor)]
  * survival factor = (1 - killing effect) / (1 - baseFactor)

Deployment has the same options as with the other model.

=== Vector Availability ===

A vector deterrent intervention functions similarly to ITN/IRS interventions, but affecting only the availability of humans to mosquitoes. Example:

{{{
    <vectorDeterrent name="hypothetical deterrency">
      <decay L="4" function="exponential"/>
      <anophelesParams mosquito="gambiae_ss">
        <deterrency value="0.2"/>
      </anophelesParams>
      <timed coverage="0.7" time="7"/>
    </vectorDeterrent>
}}}

Uses standard [ModelInterventions#Timed_descriptions timed deployment].

== Larviciding ==

A larviciding intervention is currently also available, but very simple in that there is no feedback effect of reduction in the number of adult mosquitoes on the number of larvae, nor any concept of saturation. The implementation will likely be improved in the future.

Example timed-deployment description:
{{{
<larviciding>
        <anopheles mosquito="gambiae_ss">
                <duration value="25"/>
                <effectiveness value="0.75"/>
        </anopheles>
        <anopheles mosquito="funestus">
                <duration value="25"/>
                <effectiveness value="0.75"/>
        </anopheles>
        <anopheles mosquito="arabiensis">
                <duration value="25"/>
                <effectiveness value="0.75"/>
        </anopheles>
        <timed>
            <deploy time="1"/>
            <deploy time="100"/>
        </timed>
</larviciding>
}}}

Here, the `duration` parameter specifies how long the larviciding is effective for (unit:timestep). `effectiveness` gives the proportion of larvae killed by the larviciding. The `mosquito` parameter specifies which species is affected — this must be described for all species (it will have no effect on species not explicitly listed).

== Uninfect Vectors ==

A special intervention which instantly uninfects all mosquitoes of malarial parasites (though doesn't prevent reinfection). If combining with mass drug administration to eliminate malaria from a scenario, note that humans can harbour gametocytes up to 20 days following "parasite clearance", hence vectors will need to be uninfected multiple times.

Example, clearing vector infections multiple times in line with above note about eliminating malaria:
{{{
    <MDA>
      <timed coverage="1" time="73"/>
      <timed coverage="1" time="74"/>
      <timed coverage="1" time="75"/>
      <timed coverage="1" time="76"/>
      <timed coverage="1" time="77"/>
      <timed coverage="1" time="78"/>
    </MDA>
    <uninfectVectors>
      <timed time="73"/>
      <timed time="74"/>
      <timed time="75"/>
      <timed time="76"/>
      <timed time="77"/>
      <timed time="78"/>
    </uninfectVectors>
}}}