#summary Intervention deployment methods and descriptions

= Intervention deployment =

There are two generic methods of intervention deployment in openmalaria:

 * *Timed* mass-deployment campaigns. At a particular time point, this deployment method targets either the whole population or at a restricted age-range. They also have a coverage parameter. ([http://code.google.com/p/openmalaria/wiki/XmlScenario?ts=1277108255&updated=XmlScenario#Timed:_timed Configuration])
 * Age-based *continuous* deployment. Within the simulation's intervention period, these deploy interventions to individuals reaching a target age, given that they are determined to be within the coverage. ([XmlScenario#Continuous:_continuous Configuration])

In both cases, the coverage parameter describes the probability of each individual with the required age receiving the intervention, independently of interventions received previously by that individual.

Deployment of vaccines uses these basic methods, but is a special case. Each human "remembers" how many vaccine doses they have received (through continuous and campaign deployment combined). Given a continuous vaccination schedule for vaccinating at ages `a_0`, `a_1`, ..., each individual, at age `a_n` is vaccinated (through the continuous vaccination program) if and only if they are included within the vaccine coverage, and they have had `n - 1` previous vaccinations. This is intended to account for individuals dropping out of the vaccination program and not returning, and those vaccinated through a mass campaign not also getting an age-based vaccination at (roughly) the same time.


= Intervention descriptions =

List of available interventions (TODO: document). Configuration instructions can be found [XmlScenario#Deployment_of_interventions:_interventions here].

The following table shows which deployment methods are available to which interventions.

|| intervention || timed || continuous || notes ||
|| change health system || y || n ||
|| change EIR || y || n ||
|| vaccines || y || y || age-specific doses are not taken if already taken through a (timed) mass campaign ||
|| Mass Drug Administration || y || n ||
|| Intermittend Preventative Treatment (for Infants) || y || y ||
|| Insecticide Treated Nets || y || y ||
|| Indoor Residual Spraying || y || n ||
|| Vector Availability || y || n ||
|| Immune Suppression || y || n ||
|| Larviciding || y || n ||
|| Insert R,,0,, case || y || n ||
|| Import Infections || y || n ||
|| Uninfect Vectors || y || n ||


== Change "something" ==

The `changeHS` and `changeEIR` interventions replace the original description of these items.

== Vaccines ==

Three vaccines; all those active are deployed simultaneously.

 * Pre-erythrocytic vaccine (vaccineType 1): prevents a proportion of infections from commencing.
 * Blood-stage vaccine (vaccineType 2): acts as a killing factor on blood-stage parasites
 * Transmission-blocking vaccine (vaccineType 3): one minus this scales the probability of transmission to mosquitoes

== Drug administration ==

 * MDA simply gives humans drugs. In the 5-day timestep models, these drugs are simply modelled, in that they cause full immediate clearance of parasites but have no lasting effect.
 * IPTi and IPTc. Somewhat similar to mass drug administration, but allows drugs to have a lasting effect (5-day timestep). (There is currently no equivalent for 1-day timestep models, although it only really needs drugs correctly parameterised for the new model.)

== Vector interventions ==

`ITN`s, `IRS` and a theoretical `VectorAvailability` intervention may be deployed to individuals, to reduce availability of humans to mosquitoes and the chance of a mosquito surviving feeding or resting. There is currently no notion of houses or sharing interventions in the model.

A larviciding intervention is currently also available, but very simple in that there is no feedback effect of reduction in the number of adult mosquitoes on the number of larvae, nor any concept of saturation. The implementation will likely be improved in the future.

== Pseudo interventions ==

An "intervention" importing infections allows some modelling of the stability of elimination and near-elimination scenarios: `ImportedInfectionsPerThousandHosts`. At each time point where this "intervention" is implemented, each individual in the population has some probability of becoming infected with an imported infection. As this is a stochastic process, the actual number of imported infections at each time point varies. 

Also:

 * UninfectVectors — Instantly and completely remove all infections from mosquitoes. If combining with mass drug administration to eliminate malaria from a scenario, note that humans can harbour gametocytes up to 20 days following "parasite clearance", hence vectors will need to be uninfected multiple times.
 * ImmuneSuppression — Reset all natural immunity gained by humans to zero.
 * InsertR_0Case — In order to estimate R,,0,,, it is desirable to eliminate malaria, suppress immunity, and prevent tertiary infections through a transmission-blocking vaccine. This intervention then chooses and infects exactly 1 host, gives the host an effective pre-erythrocytic vaccine to prevent self-reinfection and removes the transmission-blocking vaccine effect.