#summary Description of human-stage malarial interventions

= Human-stage interventions =

The following table lists interventions which have been implemented in OpenMalaria, and which deployment methods are available:

|| intervention || mass-deployment || continuous-deployment ||
|| [ModelIntervHuman#Change_health_system changeHS] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervHuman#Vaccines vaccine] || yes || yes (see deployment notes) ||
|| [ModelIntervHuman#Mass_drug_administration MDA] || yes || no ||
|| [ModelIntervHuman#Intermittent_Preventative_Treatment IPT] || yes || yes ||

== Change heath system ==

This intervention updates the health-system by providing an entirely new description; e.g. it can be used to simulate the effects of improved access to treatment. The `changeHS` element takes exactly the same content as the [XmlScenario#Health_system:_healthSystem healthSystem] element used to describe the initial health system.


== Vaccines ==

Three vaccine types are simulated; this intervention administers all of these which have been configured to individuals (so changing the type of vaccine used during a simulation is not currently possible). Types of vaccine:

 * Pre-erythrocytic vaccine (vaccineType `PEV`): prevents a proportion of infections from commencing.
 * Blood-stage vaccine (vaccineType `BSV`): acts as a killing factor on blood-stage parasites
 * Transmission-blocking vaccine (vaccineType `TBV`): one minus this scales the probability of transmission to mosquitoes

Note: prior to schema version 25, the vaccine type codes were 1, 2, 3 instead of `PEV, BSV, TBV`.

Vaccines need to be configured per-scenario with one or more `vaccineDescription` elements within the `descriptions` element (up to one per `vaccineType`):
{{{
    <vaccine>
      <description vaccineType="TBV">
        <decay L="0.5" function="exponential"/>
        <efficacyB value="10"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.4"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.46"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.52"/>
      </description>
      <description vaccineType="BSV">
        <decay L="0.5" function="exponential"/>
        <efficacyB value="10"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.4"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.46"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.52"/>
      </description>
      <description vaccineType="PEV">
        <decay L="0.5" function="exponential"/>
        <efficacyB value="10"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.4"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.46"/>
        <initialEfficacy value="0.52"/>
      </description>
      <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.0833"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.17"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.99" targetAgeYrs="0.25"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.99" targetAgeYrs="1.25"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.99" targetAgeYrs="2.25"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.99" targetAgeYrs="3.25"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.99" targetAgeYrs="4.25"/>
    </vaccine>
}}}
Each vaccine type described is administered. The `decay` element has type `DecayFunction` ([ModelDecayFunctions#Configuration configuration]). One or more `initialEfficacy` elements can be given specifying the efficacy of each subsequent dose of the vaccine administered (at the time of administration). If further doses are given, the last listed `initialEfficacy` is repeated.

Use standard [ModelInterventions#Continuous_descriptions continuous] description with name `vaccine` and [ModelInterventions#Timed_descriptions mass deployment] description with name `vaccinate`, although the interaction of the two deployment methods is not quite the same as with other continuously deployed interventions: if a dose has been received via mass deployment, it will not also be received via continuous deployment, and if a continuous dose is missed but later caught-up with through mass deployment, further continuous doses may also be received (continuous administration only treats individuals who have received all doses they should have through continuous programs).


== Mass Drug Administration ==

The MDA intervention models some type of mass deployment of drugs. In the 5-day timestep models, these drugs are simply modelled (drug kills 100% of parasites in all patients receiving it with no lasting effect). With the 1-day time-step model MDA interventions are more flexible and can, for example, be configured as short-action anti-malarial deployment, deployment of SP-like drugs with a long prophylactic effect and mass screen and treat.

With the 5-day time-step model no additional configuration is needed. With the 1-day TS model, an MDADescription element must be included, as, for example, below:
{{{
    <MDA>
      <description>
        <decisions>
          <decision depends="result" name="treatment" values="MQ,none">
            result(negative): none
            result(none): none
            result(positive): MQ
          </decision>
          <decision depends="" name="test" values="none,microscopy,RDT">
            RDT
          </decision>
        </decisions>
        <treatments>
          <treatment name="MQ">
            <schedule>
              <medicate drug="MQ" hour="0" mg="1200"/>
            </schedule>
          </treatment>
          <treatment name="none">
            <schedule/>
          </treatment>
        </treatments>
      </description>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="160"/>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="860"/>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="870"/>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="1580"/>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="1595"/>
      <timed coverage="0.6" time="1610"/>
    </MDA>
}}}
This has the same format as part of the [ScenarioHealthSystem#1-day_timestep:_EventScheduler EventScheduler complicated/uncomplicated trees]. The above example is fairly minimal: the `test` decision indicates that no malaria diagnostic is used, and the `treatment` decision indicates that the treatment schedule called `1` is used. Note that it may be preferable to specify dosing by age as with health-system treatment of uncomplicated malaria.


== Intermittent Preventive Treatment ==

IPTi and IPTc: Intermittent Preventive Treatment for infants or children. 
Antimalarial drugs are given at specified ages in infants according to the routine vaccination schedule (IPTi) or at regular intervals in children for whom delivery may be timed to coincide with the malaria season (IPTc). 

IPT is compatible with the 5-day timestep model. The drug action is similar to that of the mass drug administration but can have a longer lasting (prophylactic) effect and can affect individual infections with different levels of drug resistance differently. 
There is currently no equivalent for 1-day time-step models, since the PKPD model used for mass-drug administration already allows prophylactic effects and the 1-day within-host models allow more sophisticated effects of the drugs on parasite dynamics.

{{{
    <IPT>
      <description iptiEffect="18">
        <infGenotype ACR="1.0" atten="1" freq="0.8" name="wt" proph="10" tolPeriod="4"/>
        <infGenotype ACR="1.0" atten="1" freq="0.1" name="double" proph="2" tolPeriod="4"/>
        <infGenotype ACR="0.5" atten="1" freq="0.1" name="triple" proph="0" tolPeriod="4"/>
      </description>
      <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.25"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.33"/>
      <continuous coverage="0.95" targetAgeYrs="0.75"/>
      <timed time="7" coverage=".8"/>
      <timed time="79" coverage=".8"/>
    </IPT>
}}}

In this example, IPTi is given at 2, 3 and 9 months of age with a coverage of 95% for each dose.  The drug in this example is sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) and new infections are randomly assigned one of three specified genotypes (`wt`,`108`,`triples`) which correspond to different degrees of SP resistance and have frequencies `freq`. Existing wildtype infections (`wt`) are cleared with a cure rate (`ACR`) of 100%, and incoming wildtype infections are cleared for a prophylactic period (`proph`) of 10*5 days. The intervention can also be timed to simulate seasonal delivery. `iptieffect` refers to whether the IPT or placebo group should be simulated (>=10 are IPT groups) and the choice of treatment drug in those who present with malaria fevers. `atten` and `tolperiod` are not used except with alternative models for IPT described in Ross et al, 2008 PLoS ONE e2661. 


 