#summary Overview of statistics outputs

= Output of simulations =

Output from OpenMalaria simulations is currently collected using two methods. The [Monitoring monitoring] page describes how these methods work and are configured, while the [XmlMonitoring monitoring measures] page lists what data these methods are able to output.

== Surveys ==

Output from the [Monitoring#Surveys surveys] system is written at the end of the simulation to the `output.txt` (or when compiled in BOINC mode `output.txt.gz`) file. The contents are formatted as in a database, with tab-separated columns and one record per line. Each line has four columns with the following meaning:

|| survey number || third dimension || measure || value ||

The survey number starts from one and corresponds to the [Monitoring#Survey_time_points survey time point]. (Exception: measure 21 has one record from the end of the simulation and does not use the survey number or third dimension columns.)

Output can be associated with several different [Monitoring#Survey_measures measures]; the code under the label "id" in the first column of the [XmlMonitoring#Survey_measures survey measures table] appears in the third column of output.

The "third dimension" (in the second column for historical reasons) specifies another dimension of the output. For many measures it identifies the human [Monitoring#Survey_age_groups age group], for a few measures it is unused, and for some it holds a [XmlEntoVector mosquito species] or a [ModelDrug drug identifier].

Example:
{{{
1       15      2       4
}}}
Measure 2 is the "expected number of infected hosts", so this record specifies that during the first survey, the expected number of infected hosts in the fifteenth age group was 4.

== Continuous monitoring ==

Some properties of the simulation can also be monitored continuously. The [Monitoring#Continuous continuous monitoring system] writes output to the `ctsout.txt` file in real-time (while the simulation is still running). This file can be monitored while a simulation is running from LiveGraph and read from most spread-sheet programs.

This file starts with a line specifying the column separator (a tab) to make the files readable by [LiveGraph]. The next line is a header, giving a title for each column (note: spaces may occur within column names, whereas tab characters separate columns). Following this, each line corresponds to a time point.

Available outputs are listed [XmlMonitoring#Continuous_measures here]; note that some of these output a single value while others output multiple values (using titles of the format "measure (subcategory)").

== Checksum ==

When compiled in BOINC mode, an additional file is output: `scenario.sum`, which is a checksum of the input XML file.

<placeholder>