#summary Configuration of transmission models

= Transmission models =

While the malaria parasite cycle within humans is modelled by using an agent-based [ModelWithinHost model], the entomological part of malaria transmission must be modelled in a less detailed manner. We currently have two [ModelTransmission models available].

== Common entomological data ==

Entomological data are described by the `entomology` element, containing either a `vector` or a `nonVector` sub-element. For example:
{{{
<entomology mode="4" name="a name">
  <nonVector eipDuration="10">
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    <EIRDaily origin="monthly">0.0738</EIRDaily>
    ...
  </nonVector>
</entomology>
}}}

Attributes of the `entomology` element:
|| name || type || description ||
|| name || text || A user-friendly name for the transmission settings ||
|| mode || integer || Can be 2 (static — EIR humans are exposed to is fixed to the annual cycle given) or 4 (dynamic — transmission is affected by human infectiousness) ||
|| annualEIR || number, optional || If provided, the EIR description provided is scaled such that the total number of infectious bites per adult is this number. (Added in schema version 22.) ||

Note that prior to schema 24, the vector model used EIR in units of infectious bites per person per time-period, averaged across the population, while the non-vector model used units of infectious bites per adult per time-period. From schema version 24 both will use units of infectious bites per adult per day/timestep/month/year. (The difference being that children receive fewer bites than adults.)

=== Vector parameters: `vector` ===

[XmlEntoVector Vector-model parameter description.]

=== Non-vector parameters: `nonVector` ===

The `nonVector` element primarily consists of a list of daily EIR (_Entomological Inoculation Rate_) parameters (`EIRDaily` elements) specifying the annual EIR (thus 365 values are expected). In theory the first value should correspond to January 1st (though if not, it simply means timestep 0 will correspond to the same day of year as the first value here). These are averaged per timestep resulting in the EIR per timestep of the year for the pre-intervention equilibrium state. Where data for more than one year are provided, the data is assumed to wrap into the next year and all values for the same timestep of the year are averaged.

`nonVector` also has an `eipDuration` attribute: the _extrinsic incubation period_ (sporozoite development time, in days), which determines the delay before changes in human infectiousness affect the EIR (in dynamic mode only).