= !OpenMalaria =

Welcome to the !OpenMalaria wiki on google-code.

!OpenMalaria is an open source C++ program for simulating malaria epidemiology and interventions against malaria.  It is based on microsimulations of _Plasmodium falciparum_ malaria in humans, originally developed for simulating malaria vaccines and described  
[http://www.ajtmh.org/content/75/2_suppl here]. These models simulate the dynamics of malaria parasitaemia in the course of an infection, of transmission, of immunity, and of the processes leading to illness and death. The system is set up to simulate malaria in village, or district size human populations. The original models have been extended to include simulation of the dynamics of malaria in the mosquito vector, and by including alternative model structures for many of the components of the human models. The models allow for variations between humans in their exposure to mosquitoes, and in their responses to the parasite, but do not consider  

!OpenMalaria can be used to simulate interventions against malaria (both interventions against the mosquito vector, and interventions that acting against malaria in humans (e.g. by chemotherapy, or vaccines).   

!OpenMalaria makes use of a is a general platform for comparing, fitting, and evaluating different malaria models, to ensure that the models reproduce patterns of infection and disease observed in the field in malaria endemic areas. 

The main applications of !OpenMalaria are:

- Prediction of the effects of novel interventions to inform the development of target product profiles

- Prediction of the effects of different deployment strategies for existing interventions, to help in planning malaria control programs. 

Outputs from !OpenMalaria can be linked to costing data as part of economic evaluations (e.g. cost-effectiveness analyses)

= Usage =

There are several methods of carrying out predictive simulations:

 * as a [SetupOverview stand-alone program], capable of simulating a few hand-crafted scenarios and producing results analyzable with spread-sheets or simple scripts
 * via the [http://boinc.berkeley.edu/ BOINC] volunteer computing platform [http://www.malariacontrol.net/] and a semi-automated experiment design and analysis platform (under development), capable of handling entire experiments of 10000-100000 scenarios
 * via a GUI-driven job submission system (under development), capable of deploying simulations on different computer resources.

The outputs from these simulations can be linked to cost data from endemic countries to analyse the economics of malaria interventions.  

For first-time users, an overview of how to set up and use !OpenMalaria to simulate malaria in a particular field site can be found [http://code.google.com/p/openmalaria/wiki/Instructions here]. 

== Uncertainty analysis ==

The project also analyzes the uncertainty associated with sets of model predictions. 

= Development =
== [ModelsOverview Models] ==

Each simulation requires implementation of various components, from transmission to within-host parasite dynamics to drug action.

For an overview of the model-components represented, see [ModelsOverview here]. 

== [Code] ==

The openmalaria project now has a [https://www.ohloh.net/p/openmalaria considerable code base]. The core program is now entirely written in C++, having Fortran roots. TODO: an overview of the code.

Instructions for compiling the code can be found [BuildSystem here].


= Team =

!OpenMalaria is being developed by a team from the [http://www.swisstph.ch/research/epidemiology-and-public-health-eph/biostatistics-and-computational-sciences/modelling-of-malaria.html Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute (Swiss TPH)], the [http://ndssl.vbi.vt.edu/index.php Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory at Virginia Bioinformatics Institute] 
and the [http://www.lstmliverpool.ac.uk Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine] with financial support from the [http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/home.aspx Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation]

For public discussion, please use the [http://groups.google.com/group/openmalaria openmalaria] google group.

= Selected Publications =

== Descriptions of the original models for malaria in humans ==
[http://www.ajtmh.org/content/75/2_suppl AJTMH 75 supplement 2, 2006]

== Overall summary of the project ==
[http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=2657312 Parasitology (2008), 135: 1507-1516 ]

== Applications ==
[http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0003193 What Should Vaccine Developers Ask? Simulation of the Effectiveness of Malaria Vaccines]

[http://www.malariajournal.com/content/8/1/127 Simulation of the cost-effectiveness of malaria vaccines]

[http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S147149221100002X Uses of mosquito-stage transmission-blocking vaccines against Plasmodium falciparum]

[http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0002661 Modelling the Epidemiological Impact of Intermittent Preventive Treatment against Malaria in Infants]

[http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0018391 Determinants of the Cost-Effectiveness of Intermittent Preventive Treatment for Malaria in Infants and Children]

[http://www.ajtmh.org/content/83/2/230.long Comparing the Effectiveness of Malaria Vector-Control Interventions Through a Mathematical Model]


= Offline Documentation =

In case you wish to have access to the documentation on this wiki without an internet connection, you can download and extract the following:

  * [http://openmalaria.googlecode.com/svn/download/wiki-dumps/OM_wiki_dump_2011_02_17.zip OM_wiki_dump_2011_02_17.zip]