#summary A glossary of project terminology.

= Introduction =

The terminology we use for *openmalaria* project is very specific. A quick browse through the glossary below is recommended.


= Glossary =

<wiki:comment>
We define items within a <dl>...</dl> list, in alphabetical order.
<dt>...</dt> tags introduce new items.
<dd>...</dd> tags hold a description of the last item.

Syntax:
  Use *bold* to highlight the definition of a term.
  Make other terms (listed here) in a description _italic_.
</wiki:comment>

<dl>
  <dt>Arm</dt>
  <dd>Each sweep must have one or (usually) more values for each of its factors. An *arm* is one of these combinations of values — a configuration assigning a value to each factor on the sweep.</dd>
  <dt>Bout</dt>
  <dd>In our 1 day time-step clinical model, a *bout* of sickness is considered to be a fever or severe illness that usually lasts no more than 5 days. When an individual recovers (or dies), that bout is considered over. </dd>
  <dt>Component</dt>
  <dd>The simulator is divided up into several *components*: e.g. within-host, transmission, health-system. From a computing perspective these may be called _interfaces_.</dd>
  <dt>Demography</dt>
  <dd>A description of the ages and gender ratio of the human population from which individuals will be drawn</dd>
  <dt>Episode</dt>
  <dd>The health-system's reporting unit; only one malaria *episode* is possible in a 30-day period. Therefore, each bout is either considered the start of a new episode, or, if it occurs within 30 days of a previous bout, part of the same episode. Thus, at least in low transmission settings, an episode should roughly correspond to one malaria infection (which can cause multiple bouts). An episode's severity (non-malarial, malarial or severe) is considered to be that of its worst bout.</dd>
  <dt>Event</dt> 
  <dd>In clinical models, an occurrence without measurable duration.</dd>
  <dt>Experiment</dt>
  <dd>Largely synonymous with a study, an *experiment* is the complete description of all sweeps and arms used, together with the scenarios generated and results produced. Each scenario is generated by choosing one arm for each sweep in the experiment.</dd>
  <dt>Full factorial design</dt>
  <dd>A *full factorial* experiment is one where all possible scenarios are generated: all combinations of one arm per sweep are used.</dd>
  <dt>Health system memory</dt>
  <dd>The pre-determined, fixed period of time, currently set at 30 days, during which all bouts of illness are considered to be related to the same infection. The *health system memory* has implications for reporting and for treatment practices.</dd>
  <dt>Implementation</dt>
  <dd>Each _component_ needs at least one *implementation*, describing how the relevent processes are simulated. Logically, these can also be called _models_.</dd>
  <dt>Intervention</dt>
  <dd>During the a simulation of a _scenario_, some type of *intervention* may be used, usually with the aim of reducing malaria transmission, prevalence, clinical manifestations or costs. These _interventions_ may be deployed at a point in time (*timed* mode) or whenever humans reach a certain age (*continuous* mode).</dd>
  <dd>The methods for simulating the deployment of interventions in *openmalaria* have also been used to simulate the effects of other phenomena which are not interventions, therefore termed *pseudo interventions* (see [ModelInterventions#Pseudo_interventions examples]).</dd>
  <dt>Model</dt>
  <dd>The *openmalaria* simulator platform supports several *models*: each is a selection of options (including a choice of _implementations_) defining how _scenarios_ are simulated. </dd>
  <dd>In the past, both _components_ and _implementations_ have been referred to as *models*.</dd>
  <dt>Non-malarial fever</dt>
  <dd>A febrile illness, accompanied or not by parasites in the blood, which is not caused by malaria parasites.</dd>
  <dt>OpenMalaria</dt>
  <dd>*openmalaria* is the name of the C++ project and is the implementation of our simulator; i.e. the source code on this website.</dd>
  <dt>Parameterization</dt>
  <dd>Each _model_ has several parameters. A choice of values for each of these parameters leads to a *parameterization* of a _model_. We usually use a fitting process involving several _scenarios_ modelling field trials in order to find an optimal parameterizations.</dd>
  <dt>Scenario</dt>
  <dd>A scenario is a single simulation run by the model.  Encoded in XML, the *scenario* file includes a description of what exactly *openmalaria* should the simulate: the _model_ and  its _parameterization_,the _demographic_setting, _interventions_ applied, and information about the healthsystem, if relevant to the _study_.</dd>
  <dt>Seed</dt>
  <dd>In stochastic modeling, we have a bit of conundrum, we need to be able to generate a random sequence but we also need to be able to reproduce our results in order to test them.  In order to achieve both goals simultaneously, we must declare the starting point for the (pseudo-) random number generator when it is called. This starting point, or *seed* is generally a positive integer. If no seed is given, the simulator will take the initial value from the computer's cpu clock - the simulation would run, but we would not be able to repeat it. Additionally, when we say that an experiment was run with 5 *seeds*, we mean that each scenario was run 5 times, each time with a different random seed.</dd>
  <dt>Severe malaria</dt>
  <dd>Clinical malaria illness that is life-threatening if left untreated.</dd>
  <dt>Study</dt>
  <dd>A simulation *study* comprises a set of scenarios used to make a specific set of comparisons between settings or interventions.  A field *study* is conducted on location with real patients. Results from field studies are used to parameterize models.</dd>
  <dt>Sweep</dt>
  <dd>A *sweep* is one or more covarying factors, and the set of all arms of this sweep.</dd>
</dl>