#summary Methods of running test cases and custom scenarios

= Introduction =

OpenMalaria comes with several [http://code.google.com/p/openmalaria/source/browse/#svn/trunk/test test scenarios] which can be used both as template scenarios and to check that OpenMalaria is working as usual. This page describes how one can run these tests and run other scenarios.  *Note that the test scenarios include many non-default options which will mostly need to be removed if the XML is used a template for simulating malaria in the real world*. Some further
[http://openmalaria.googlecode.com/svn/application_deployment/examples/ examples] can be used. The [http://openmalaria.googlecode.com/svn/application_deployment/examples/centre_scenario.xml centre scenario] from [http://www.malariajournal.com/content/11/1/20 Briët et al., 2012] is a good starting point. 

== Schema versions ==

OpenMalaria's [ScenarioDesign scenarios] are described in an XML document, which must conform to the executable's XSD (Xml Schema Document) version (as of recently running OpenMalaria with the `--version` command-line option will print the current schema version together with the oldest version which would potentially be compatible). In any case, the schema document relevant to the current scenario (e.g. `scenario_23.xsd`) must be present, usually in the working directory, when running a scenario.

Usually new schema versions introduce new features, and in some cases no changes (other than increasing the version number) is needed when updating scenarios to a later schema version, while in other cases further changes are necessary. In any case, scenarios can be updated with the [XmlUpdateScenario SchemaTranslator] tool.

== Running scenarios ==

=== Test scenarios ===

If you have built OpenMalaria from source, all of its test scenarios can be run via the `RUN_TESTS` build target (IDEs), by running `make test`, with `ctest`, or with custom settings via the `test/run.py` script. These tools are mostly aimed at testing the OpenMalaria executable and are [BuildSystem#Running_the_tests documented on the BuildSystem page].

=== General scenarios ===

Individual and batches of scenarios can be run using

  * [openmalariaTools OpenMalariaTools] (usually the easiest method)
  * By renaming scenarioX.xml, placing in the `test` dir, and using [BuildSystem#Running_the_tests run.py] (sometimes useful, such as when forcing checkpointing or using GDB)
  * By running OpenMalaria directly from a command-line or shell script, as below

In theory, one could also just (double) click on `openMalaria[.exe]` to run it. This, however, has some problems:
  * If errors occur, you can't see the error messages can't do any more than guess at the problem
  * It always uses the `scenario.xml` input file
  * Output always goes to the same file (output.txt or output.txt.gz) and if this file already exists OpenMalaria won't run.

==== Script files ====

OpenMalaria can be launched using a simple script file.

On Windows, create a text file called `runOpenMalaria.bat` (make sure you enable explorer options to show file extension, and that it does actually end with `.bat`), and add the following contents (using Notepad or a [UtilsWindows better text editor]):
{{{
del output.txt
openMalaria.exe --scenario scenario.xml
pause
}}}

On Linux, the following might work (although running from a command-line as below might be easier). Create a file called `runOpenMalaria.sh` (name isn't important), change the properties to make it executable, and add the following content:
{{{
#!/bin/sh
rm -f output.txt
./openMalaria --scenario scenario.xml
read
}}}

I should also explain what those scripts do, and how you can edit them. The first line in the .sh file (`#!/bin/sh`) is required to say its a shell script (run by /bin/sh). The next line deletes the old output file using `del`/`rm` (we use the `-f` flag with `rm` to _force_ it to remove the old file, and not prompt "do you really want to delete ..."). Then we run openmalaria: note the name is different, and with unix .sh files we need to prepend it with `./`. We give it one option: `--scenario` which takes one argument, the file name of the input scenario document (you can change the name here; see below for more options). Finally, we use `pause`/`read` to make the terminal window running the script stay open until you press _return_ so that you can read any output. A summary of commands:

|| .sh || .bat || Description ||
|| ls || dir || Prints a list of files & directories in the current directory (useful from a command-line) ||
|| cd || cd || Change directory ||
|| rm || del || Delete a file ||
|| read || pause || Something to wait for user input ||

You may also want to know what options you can use with openmalaria. The following is what it prints with the --help option (actually, more options have been added recently; run with --help yourself to see):
{{{
Usage: ./openMalaria [options]

Options:
 -p --resource-path     Path to look up input resources with relative URLs (defaults to
                        working directory). Not used for output files.
    --scenario file.xml Uses file.xml as the scenario. If not given, scenario.xml is used.
                        If path is relative (doesn't start '/'), --resource-path is used.
 -m --print-model       Print all model options with a non-default value and exit.
 -c --checkpoint        Forces checkpointing once during simulation (during initialisation
                        period), exiting after completing each
                        checkpoint. Doesn't require BOINC to do the checkpointing.
    --compress-checkpoints=boolean
                        Set checkpoint compression on or off. Default is on.
 -h --help              Print this message.
Printed help; exiting...
}}}
(Probably the --scenario option is the only one you'll want to use.)

==== Command line ====

The above commands are relevant for the command-lines too (the script files are, in fact, just a list of commands used by the shell/command prompt). On Windows this is usually not a convenient option, but on Unix is often the easiest way of doing things. To run OpenMalaria from a terminal on Linux or Mac,

  * Open a terminal (xterm, konsole, iterm, etc.)
  * `cd` to a directory containing the scenario file, `.xsd` file, and auxiliary files (`densities.csv`, etc)
  * Check there is no existing `output.txt`/`output.txt.gz` or `ctsout.txt` file
  * Run `./openMalaria --scenario MyScenario.xml` (or with another path)

(If you don't know how to do the above, a [http://www.google.com/search?q=bash+tutorial bash] or [http://www.google.com/search?q=shell+tutorial shell] tutorial may be a good starting point.)