#summary XML scenario vector-model parameters

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Vector parameters =

The vector model is described by per-species interactions with hosts, where hosts may be humans or one of a few specified non-human populations (e.g. sprayed & unsprayed animals).

The vector element consists of a list of at least one `anopheles` sub-element, followed by a list of zero or more `nonHumanHosts` sub-elements. Each has a name, which serves as an identifier for the anopheles-mosquito species or non-human-host category (for example, to match per-species vector intervention parameters specified elsewhere with the correct species).

== Mosquito parameters ==

Each anopheles elements has the following sub-elements: `eir`, `mosq`, and a list of zero or more `nonHumanHosts`.

=== Entomological Infection Rate ===

The `eir` element describes the Entomological Infection Rate for this mosquito species, which is used as a target when fitting the emergence rate of adult mosquitoes. The EIR is given via a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier_series Fourier series] and a rotation offset; more accurately, the exposed EIR, in units of bites per day, is:

<wiki:gadget url="http://mathml-gadget.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mathml-gadget.xml" border="0" up_content="eir_t = exp ( a_0 + sum_(n=1)^2 { a_n cos(n (w t - theta)) + b_n sin(n (w t - theta)) } )"/>

(Formula uses MathML. For IE, a [http://www.dessci.com/en/products/mathplayer/ plugin] is needed.)

where `t` is the day of year (from 0 to 364), `w = 2π / 365`, `θ` is the `EIRRotateAngle` attribute and `a_0` - `a_2`, `b_1` - `b_2` are the corresponding attributes of the `eir` element.

=== Mosquito lifecycle and human-interaction parameters ===

Other per-species mosquito parameters (except non-human-host interaction) are described in the `mosq` element. This has the following attributes:

|| name || type || unit || description ||
|| mosqRestDuration || int || days || Duration of the resting period of the vector ||
|| extrinsicIncubationPeriod || int || days || Extrinsic incubation period (time required for sporozoite development) ||
|| mosqLaidEggsSameDayProportion || double || proportion || Proportion of mosquitoes host seeking on same day as ovipositing ||
|| mosqSeekingDuration || double || days || Maximum proportion of day spent host-seeking by the vector ||
|| mosqSurvivalFeedingCycleProbability || double || probability || Probability that the mosquito survives the feeding cycle||
|| mosqProbBiting || double || probability || Probability that the mosquito succesfully bites chosen host ||
|| mosqProbFindRestSite || double || probability || Probability that the mosquito escapes host and finds a resting place after biting ||
|| mosqProbResting || double || probability || Probability of mosquito successfully resting after finding a resting site ||
|| mosqProbOvipositing || double || probability || Probability of a mosquito successfully laying eggs given that it has rested ||
|| mosqHumanBloodIndex || double || proportion || Human blood index: the proportion of resting mosquitoes which fed on human blood during the last feed  ||

== Non-human host parameters ==

Non-human parameters are contianed within two sets of elements (all called `nonHumanHosts`): for vector transmission as a whole, and per species.

The first is a list of sub-elements of the `vector` element (under `entoData`), each containing just the category `name` and the `number` of hosts of that type.

Mosquito-host interaction parameters for these categories are then described within the `anopheles` elements, with the attributes:

|| name || type || unit || description ||
|| name || string || || Identifier for this category of non-human hosts ||
|| mosqRelativeEntoAvailability || double || proportion || Relative availability of nonhuman hosts of type i (to other nonhuman hosts) ||
|| mosqProbBiting || double || probability || Probability of mosquito successfully biting host ||
|| mosqProbFindRestSite || double || probability || Probability that the mosquito escapes host and finds a resting place after biting ||
|| mosqProbResting || double || probability || Probability of mosquito successfully resting after finding a resting site ||