
= Automatic schema version update =

If you use some scenarios working with an older schema version, these can be updated with the schema translator. The translation may not work for all scenarios, but it will point out the area where it detects an  ambiguous situation, by either asking you to specify the value of a certain flag and then rerun the translator, or by pointing out where a manual edit in the scenario is required.

The schema translator can be used within [openmalariaTools] or as a stand-alone tool.

== Build and Install ==
  
Building the schema translator from sources:

  # Check if JDK of at least version 5 is installed. 
     * If it's not the case, then you can download the installer [http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/widget/jdk6.jsp, here]. 
     * On Ubuntu linux you can install JDK with apt. Install the `sun-java6-jdk` (or `java-gcj-compat-dev`) package.
  # Find the sources. 
     * If you are already working with the OpenMalaria source code, then you can find the schema translator source files in `util/SchemaTranslator`
     * Grab from the repository:
     {{{svn checkout http://openmalaria.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/util/SchemaTranslator SchemaTranslator}}}
  # Build the sources.
     * in the sources folder do {{{javac SchemaTranslator.java}}}

== Usage ==

  # Put the scenarios to be converted in the `scenarios` folder (sub-folders are fine too — directory structures are preserved)
  # Run the program from terminal or command line with the command `java SchemaTranslator`
     * If running from another location, use `java -classpath path_to_schematranslator_folder SchemaTranslator`
     * other options can be used if necessary, as below
  # Check warning/error messages in the program's output
  # Use updated scenarios from the `translatedScenarios` folder

If you don't add any options, then the scenarios will be converted to the latest schema version.

=== Options ===

Below are some of the most useful options. To see a full list, run the schema translator with the help option: `java SchemaTranslator --help`

   * `--required_version XX`: The version number to update the scenarios to. By default, the latest schema version will be used.
   * `--current-schema --schema-folder ../../build/schema`: update to the latest development schema, which is at `../../build/schema/scenario_current.xsd`
   * `--no-validation`: if no xsd file is available, scenarios can still be translated with this option but standard XML schema checks can't be done
   * `--maxDensCorrection BOOL`: Update 12->13 requires this sometimes: set true to include bug fix, false to explicitly exclude it.
   * `--iptiSpOptionWithoutInterventions`: For scenarios with iptiDescription but without interventions, assume usage of the IPTI model was (t) intended or (f) a mistake.

 